UNITED NATIONS
Security Council

S
Distr. GENERAL S/RES/1146 (1997) 23 December 1997

RESOLUTION 1146 (1997)
Adopted by the Security Council at its 3846th meeting, on 23 December 1997

The Security Council,
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus of 8 December 1997 (S/1997/962),

Welcoming also the report of the Secretary-General on his Mission of Good Offices in Cyprus of 12 December 1997 (S/1997/973),
Noting that the Government of Cyprus has agreed that in view of the prevailing conditions in the island it is necessary to keep the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) beyond 31 December 1997,
Reaffirming all its earlier relevant resolutions on Cyprus, and in particular resolutions 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964, 367 (1975) of 12 March 1975, 939 (1994) of 29 July 1994 and 1117 (1997) of 27 June 1997,

Noting with concern the tensions along the ceasefire lines remain high, despite the further decrease in the number of serious incidents in the last six months, and that restrictions to UNFICYP's freedom of movement have increased,

Reiterating its concern that negotiations on a comprehensive political solution have yet to make progress, despite the efforts made at the two rounds of direct negotiations, held in July and August 1997, between the leaders of the two communities, at the initiative of the Secretary-General,
1. Decides to extend the mandate of UNFICYP for a further period ending on 30 June 1998;

2. Reminds both sides of their obligations to prevent any violence directed against UNFICYP personnel, to cooperate fully with UNFICYP and to ensure its complete freedom of movement;

3. Underlines the importance of early agreement to the reciprocal measures for the reduction of tension along the ceasefire lines proposed and

97-37846 (E)

/...

S/RES/1146 (1997) Page 2
subsequently adapted by UNFICYP, notes the fact that only one side has so far accepted this package, calls for early agreement to and rapid implementation of reciprocal measures and encourages UNFICYP to continue its efforts towards that end;
4. Calls upon the leaders of the two communities to continue the discussions on security issues begun on 26 September 1997;
5. Calls upon the military authorities on both sides to refrain from any action, particularly in the vicinity of the buffer zone, which would exacerbate tensions;
6. Reiterates its grave concern at the continuing excessive and increasing levels of military forces and armaments in the Republic of Cyprus and the rate at which they are being expanded, upgraded and modernized, including by the introduction of sophisticated weaponry, and the lack of progress towards any significant reduction in the number of foreign troops in the Republic of Cyprus, which threaten to raise tensions both on the island and in the region and complicate efforts to negotiate an overall political settlement;
7. Calls upon all concerned to commit themselves to a reduction in defence spending and a reduction in the number of foreign troops in the Republic of Cyprus to help restore confidence between the parties and as a first step towards the withdrawal of non-Cypriot forces as described in the set of ideas (S/24472, Annex), stresses the importance of eventual demilitarization of the Republic of Cyprus as an objective in the context of an overall comprehensive settlement, and encourages the Secretary-General to continue to promote efforts in this direction;
8. Reiterates that the status quo is unacceptable, and stresses its support for the Secretary-General's mission of good offices and the importance of concerted efforts to work with the Secretary-General towards an overall comprehensive settlement;
9. Expresses its full support for the intention of the Secretary-General to resume in March 1998 the open-ended process of negotiations initiated by the Secretary-General in July 1997 and aimed at achieving a comprehensive settlement;
10. Calls upon the leaders of the two communities to commit themselves to this process of negotiations and to cooperate actively and constructively with the Secretary-General and his Special Adviser, and urges all States to lend their full support to these efforts;
11. Further calls in this context upon all parties concerned to create a climate for reconciliation and genuine mutual confidence on both sides, and to avoid any actions which might increase tension, including through further expansion of military forces and armaments;
12. Reaffirms its position that a Cyprus settlement must be based on a State of Cyprus with a single sovereignty and international personality and a single citizenship, with its independence and territorial integrity safeguarded,
/...

S/RES/1146 (1997) Page 3
and comprising two politically equal communities as described in the relevant Security Council resolutions, in a bi-communal and bi-zonal federation, and that such a settlement must exclude union in whole or in part with any other country or any form of partition or secession;
13. Welcomes the ongoing efforts by UNFICYP to implement its humanitarian mandate in respect of Greek Cypriots and Maronites living in the northern part of the island, and Turkish Cypriots living in the Southern part, and welcomes also the progress in the implementation of recommendations arising out of the humanitarian review undertaken by UNFICYP in 1995 as mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General;
14. Welcomes also the agreement reached between the leaders of the two communities on 31 July 1997 on the issue of missing persons in Cyprus;
15. Welcomes further the efforts of the United Nations and others concerned to promote the holding of bi-communal events so as to build cooperation, trust and mutual respect between the two communities, commends the increase in such bi-communal activity in the last six months, acknowledges the recent cooperation from all concerned on both sides to that end, and strongly encourages them to take further steps to facilitate such bi-communal events and to ensure that they take place in conditions of safety and security;
16. Recognizes that the decision of the European Union concerning the opening of accession negotiations with Cyprus is an important development;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report by 10 June 1998 on the implementation of this resolution;
18. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
-----

