UNITED NATIONS
Security Council

S
Distr. GENERAL S/RES/1216 (1998) 21 December 1998

RESOLUTION 1216 (1998)
Adopted by the Security Council at its 3958th meeting, on 21 December 1998
The Security Council,
Reaffirming the statements of its President of 6 November 1998 (S/PRST/1998/31) and 30 November 1998 (S/PRST/1998/35),
Gravely concerned by the crisis facing Guinea-Bissau and the serious humanitarian situation affecting the civilian population in Guinea-Bissau,
Expressing its firm commitment to preserve the unity, sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity of Guinea-Bissau,
1. Welcomes the agreements between the Government of Guinea-Bissau and the Self-Proclaimed Military Junta signed in Praia on 26 August 1998 (S/1998/825), and in Abuja on 1 November 1998 (S/1998/1028, annex) and the Additional Protocol signed in Lomé on 15 December 1998 (S/1998/1178, annex);
2. Calls upon the Government and the Self-Proclaimed Military Junta to implement fully all the provisions of the agreements, including with regard to respect for the ceasefire, the urgent establishment of a government of national unity, the holding of general and presidential elections no later than the end of March 1999, and the immediate opening of the airport and seaport in Bissau, and, in cooperation with all concerned, the withdrawal of all foreign troops in Guinea-Bissau and the simultaneous deployment of the interposition force of the Military Observer Group (ECOMOG) of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);
3. Commends the Member States of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries and ECOWAS on the key role they are playing to restore peace and security throughout Guinea-Bissau, and on their intention to participate with others in the observation of the forthcoming general and presidential elections and welcomes the role of ECOMOG in the implementation of the Abuja Agreement, aimed at guaranteeing security along the Guinea-Bissau/Senegal border, keeping apart the parties in conflict and guaranteeing free access to humanitarian

98-40084 (E)

/...

S/RES/1216 (1998) Page 2
organizations and agencies to reach the affected civilian populations, to be carried out in accordance, inter alia, with paragraph 6 below;
4. Approves the implementation by the ECOMOG interposition force of its mandate referred to in paragraph 3 above in a neutral and impartial way and in conformity with United Nations peacekeeping standards to achieve its objective to facilitate the return to peace and security by monitoring the implementation of the Abuja Agreement;
5. Calls upon all concerned, including the Government and the SelfProclaimed Military Junta, to respect strictly relevant provisions of international law, including humanitarian and human rights law, and to ensure safe and unimpeded access by international humanitarian organizations to persons in need of assistance as a result of the conflict;
6. Affirms that the ECOMOG interposition force may be required to take action to ensure the security and freedom of movement of its personnel in the discharge of its mandate;
7. Requests ECOMOG to provide periodic reports at least every month through the Secretary-General, the first report to be made one month after deployment of its troops;
8. Requests also the Secretary-General to make recommendations to the Council on a possible role of the United Nations in the process of peace and reconciliation in Guinea-Bissau, including the early establishment of arrangements for liaison between the United Nations and ECOMOG;
9. Reiterates its appeal to States and organizations concerned to provide urgent humanitarian assistance to displaced persons and refugees;
10. Reiterates also its call on States to provide voluntarily financial, technical and logistical support to assist ECOMOG to carry out its peacekeeping role in Guinea-Bissau;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps to establish a Trust Fund for Guinea-Bissau which would assist in supporting the ECOMOG interposition force in providing logistical support to them and encourages Member States to contribute to the Fund;
12. Requests further the Secretary-General to keep the Security Council regularly informed of the situation in Guinea-Bissau and to submit a report to it by 17 March 1999 on the implementation of the Abuja Agreement including the implementation by the ECOMOG interposition force of its mandate;
13. Decides to review the situation, including the implementation of the present resolution, before the end of March 1999, on the basis of the report of the Secretary-General referred to in paragraph 12 above;
14. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
-----

