
Resolution 580 (1985) Adopted by the Security Council at its 2639th meeting,
on 30 December 1985 
  


Publisher
UN Security Council


Publication Date
30 December 1985


Citation / Document Symbol
S/RES/580 (1985)


Reference
1985 Security Council Resolutions


Cite as

UN Security Council, Resolution 580 (1985) Adopted by the Security Council at its 2639th meeting,
on 30 December 1985, 30 December 1985, S/RES/580 (1985), available at: http://www.refworld.org/docid/3b00f16030.html [accessed 4 April 2016]        

   


    
The Security Council,  
Taking note of the letter dated 23 December 1985 from the Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of Lesotho to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17692), Having heard the statement by the Honourable Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Lesotho, Mr. V.M. Makhele,  
Bearing in mind that all Member States must refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purpose of the Charter of the United Nations,  
Recalling its resolution 527 (1982) of 15 December 1982,  
Gravely concerned at the recent unprovoked and premeditated killings for which South Africa is responsible in violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Kingdom of Lesotho, and their consequences for peace and security in southern Africa,  
Gravely concerned that this aggressive act is aimed at weakening the determined and unrelenting humanitarian support given by Lesotho to South African refugees,  
Grieved at the tragic loss of life of six South African refugees and three nationals of Lesotho resulting from this aggressive act committed against Lesotho,  
Alarmed at the fact that the continued existence of apartheid in South Africa is the root cause of increased violence both within South Africa and from South Africa against neighbouring countries,  
1.       Strongly condemns these killings and recent acts of unprovoked and premeditated violence, for which South Africa is responsible, against the Kingdom of Lesotho in flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country;  
2.       Demands the payment by South Africa of full and adequate compensation to the Kingdom of Lesotho for the damage and loss of life resulting from this aggressive act;  
3.       Calls upon all parties to normalize their relations and to employ established channels of communication on all matters of mutual concern;  
4.       Reaffirms Lesotho's right to receive and give sanctuary to the victims of apartheid in accordance with its traditional practice, humanitarian principles and its international obligations;  
5.       Requests Member States to extend urgently all necessary economic assistance to Lesotho in order to strengthen its capacity to receive, maintain and protect South African refugees in Lesotho;  
6.       Calls upon the South African Government to resort to peaceful means in resolving international problems in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations;  
7.       Further calls upon South Africa to live up to its commitment not to destabilize neighbouring countries nor to allow its territory to be used as a springboard for attacks against neighbouring countries and to declare publicly that it will, in future, comply with provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and that it will not commit acts of violence against Lesotho either directly or through its proxies;  
8.       Demands that South Africa forthwith take meaningful steps towards dismantling of apartheid;  
9.       Requests the Secretary-General to establish, in consultation with the Government of Lesotho, an appropriate presence, one or two civilians in Maseru, for purposes of keeping him informed of any development affecting the territorial integrity of Lesotho;  
10.     Further requests the Secretary-General through appropriate means to monitor the implementation of the present resolution and the prevailing situation and to report regularly to the Security Council as the situation demands;  
11.     Decides to remain seized of the matter.       
