UNITED NATIONS
Security Council

S
Distr. GENERAL S/RES/1064 (1996) 11 July 1996

RESOLUTION 1064 (1996)
Adopted by the Security Council at its 3679th meeting, on 11 July 1996
The Security Council,
Reaffirming its resolution 696 (1991) of 30 May 1991 and all subsequent relevant resolutions,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General dated 27 June 1996 (S/1996/503),
Reaffirming its commitment to preserve the unity and territorial integrity of Angola,
Reiterating the importance it attaches to full and timely implementation by the Government of Angola and União Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA) of the "Acordos de paz" (S/22609, annex), the Lusaka Protocol (S/1994/1441, annex) and relevant Security Council resolutions,
Noting with approval the recent progress made towards consolidating the peace process, but reiterating that the overall pace has been slow,
Reminding the parties that if the peace process is to succeed they must show greater readiness to implement in good time their commitments, and to act in the spirit of flexibility and compromise,
Welcoming the successful conclusion of military talks between the two parties which paves the way for the formation of the unified armed forces,
Noting the agreement reached between the President of Angola and the leader of UNITA on the establishment of the Government of National Unity and Reconciliation,
Emphasizing the necessity for adequate security for all United Nations and other international personnel,

96-17292 (E)

/...

S/RES/1064 (1996) Page 2
Underlining the need for respect for human rights and urging the Angolan parties to give greater attention to preventing and investigating incidents of human rights abuse,
Noting with approval the progress made towards free circulation of people and goods, and emphasizing the importance of continuation of demining efforts to make that free circulation possible and to restore public confidence,
Stressing the importance of the demilitarization of Angolan society, including disarmament of the civilian population and the demobilization and social reintegration of ex-combatants,
Reiterating the importance of reconstruction and rehabilitation of the Angolan national economy and its vital contribution to a durable peace,
Welcoming the efforts by Member States, in particular the three observer States to the Angolan peace process, the Organization of African Unity, and the international community as a whole, to promote peace and security in Angola,
1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General dated 27 June 1996;
2. Decides to extend the mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) until 11 October 1996;
3. Acknowledges the recent progress in consolidation of the peace process, but expresses regret that its implementation is still behind schedule;
4. Commends both parties for the adoption of the framework agreement on military matters, and for beginning the incorporation of UNITA military personnel into the Angolan Armed Forces (FAA) and expresses its satisfaction with the positive role of the Joint Commission and the armed conflict prevention group in support of the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol;
5. Welcomes the efforts of both parties in lifting checkpoints and opening major routes, emphasizes the importance of full completion of such efforts to ensure the free circulation of people and goods, stresses the importance of extending State administration throughout the country, and encourages the Government of Angola to use units of the newly integrated military forces to improve the security situation;
6. Welcomes also the progress made so far by the registration of over 52,000 UNITA troops in quartering areas and calls upon UNITA to complete the credible and fully verifiable quartering of all its troops in accordance with the Joint Commission timetable, and hand over to UNAVEM III all arms, in particular heavy weapons, ammunition and military equipment, without which the quartering process will not be complete;
7. Reiterates that quartering and disarming of UNITA troops are crucial components of the peace process which are fundamental to its success;
/...

S/RES/1064 (1996) Page 3
8. Urges UNITA to make available for duty, as agreed by the Joint Commission, the Generals and other high ranking military officers designated to enter the FAA, as well as the UNITA officials designated to take up posts in the State administration at the national, provincial and local levels;
9. Commends the Government of Angola for the promulgation of the Amnesty Law, for the quartering of the rapid reaction police, and for the continuing withdrawal of FAA to barracks, and urges the Government to take the required corrective measures regarding the withdrawal movements, as agreed with UNAVEM, and to reach agreement with UNAVEM on remaining withdrawal operations;
10. Welcomes the launching of the programme for the disarmament of the civilian population by the Government of Angola, and stresses the need for its full and effective implementation;
11. Notes the closing of eight out of fifteen UNITA quartering areas for the induction of additional troops, requests the Government of Angola to prepare a programme for phased demobilization and social reintegration of ex-combatants, and calls upon both parties and the international community to extend their full cooperation and support to that end;
12. Urges the Government of Angola and UNITA to take all necessary steps for completion of the formation of the national armed forces, in particular the establishment of integrated headquarters, for the planned movement of UNITA troops out of quartering areas in accordance with the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol, and for the orderly transition of demobilized troops to civilian life;
13. Urges also the Government of Angola and UNITA to take all necessary steps for all elected members of Parliament to take their seats in the National Assembly, for moving constitutional issues forward in a spirit of national reconciliation, and for the formation of the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, and for the incorporation of UNITA personnel into the State administration, the FAA and the national police;
14. Encourages the President of Angola and the leader of UNITA to meet at the earliest opportunity within Angola to resolve all remaining issues;
15. Notes the progress made in the area of demining, encourages both parties to intensify their demining efforts and stresses the need for continued commitment to peace by destroying stockpiles of landmines;
16. Notes the reduction in the intensity and frequency of hostile propaganda, and reminds the parties of their obligation to cease the dissemination of all hostile propaganda with a view to promoting a spirit of tolerance, coexistence and mutual trust;
17. Urges the Government of Angola to provide the requisite facilities for the establishment of the independent United Nations radio, and also urges UNITA to finalize the transformation of its radio station Vorgan into a non-partisan station;
/...

S/RES/1064 (1996) Page 4
18. Reaffirms the obligation of all States to implement fully the provisions of paragraph 19 of resolution 864 (1993) of 15 September 1993 and notes with concern that the failure by States, in particular those neighbouring Angola, to do so is inconsistent with the peace process and undermines economic recovery;
19. Reiterates that continuing acquisition of weapons would be contrary to paragraph 12 of resolution 976 (1995) of 8 February 1995 and would undermine confidence in the peace process;
20. Condemns the use of mercenaries;
21. Demands that all parties and others concerned in Angola take all necessary measures to ensure the safety of United Nations and other international personnel and premises, and to guarantee the safety and freedom of movement of humanitarian supplies throughout the country, and reminds the parties to extend full cooperation to UNAVEM III at all levels;
22. Strongly urges Member States to provide promptly the financial resources necessary to facilitate the demobilization and social reintegration of ex-combatants through the United Nations consolidated inter-agency appeal for Angola;
23. Urges the international community to fulfil expeditiously its pledges to provide assistance to facilitate the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the Angolan national economy and the resettlement of displaced persons, stresses the importance of such assistance at this time in order to consolidate the gains in the peace process, and calls upon the two parties to meet their obligations under the Lusaka Protocol in order to create the necessary stability for economic recovery;
24. Commends the efforts of the Secretary-General, his Special Representative, and the personnel of UNAVEM III, and expresses confidence in their abilities to continue to facilitate the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to report by 1 October 1996 on the progress made towards meeting the goals and timetable agreed between the two parties, and to keep the Council fully informed on a regular basis on developments in the situation on the ground, in particular by providing a comprehensive briefing by the third week of August on whether the two parties have fulfilled the task of forming the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation;
26. Declares that it will place special emphasis, during its future discussion of the mandate of UNAVEM III, on the progress demonstrated by the parties;
27. Reminds the Government of Angola and UNITA of its resolution 976 (1995) of 8 February 1995 which stated, inter alia, the expectation that UNAVEM III would complete its mission by February 1997;
/...

S/RES/1064 (1996) Page 5
28. Reiterates its readiness, in light of recommendations by the Secretary-General and the state of affairs in Angola, to consider any further measures;
29. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
-----

