
Resolution 853 (1993) Adopted by the Security Council at its 3259th meeting,
on 29 July 1993 
  


Publisher
UN Security Council


Publication Date
29 July 1993


Citation / Document Symbol
S/RES/853 (1993)


Reference
1993 Security Council Resolutions


Cite as

UN Security Council, Resolution 853 (1993) Adopted by the Security Council at its 3259th meeting,
on 29 July 1993, 29 July 1993, S/RES/853 (1993), available at: http://www.refworld.org/docid/3b00f15a60.html [accessed 4 April 2016]        

   


    
The Security Council,  
Reaffirming its resolution 822 (1993) of 30 April 1993,  
Having considered the report issued on 27 July 1993 by the Chairman of the Mink Group of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) (S/26184),  
Expressing its serious concern at the deterioration of relations between the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijani Republic and at the tensions between them,  
Welcoming acceptance by the parties concerned at the timetable of urgent steps to implement its resolution 822 (1993) ,  
Noting with alarm the escalation in armed hostilities and, in particular, the seizure of the district of Agdam in the Azerbaijani Republic,  
Concerned that this situation continues to endanger peace and security in the region,  
Expressing once again its grave concern at the displacement of large numbers of civilians in the Azerbaijani Republic and at the serious humanitarian emergency in the region,  
Reaffirming the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Azerbaijani Republic and of all other States in the region,  
Reaffirming also the inviolability of international borders and the inadmissability of the use of force for the acquisition of territory,  
1.       Condemns the seizure of the district of Agdam and of all other recently occupied areas of the Azerbaijani Republic;  
2.       Further condemns all hostile actions in the region, in particular attacks on civilians and bombardments of inhabited areas;  
3.       Demands the immediate cessation of all hostilities and the immediate complete and unconditional withdrawal of the occupying forces involved from the district of Agdam and all other recently occupied areas of the Azerbaijan Republic;  
4.       Calls on the parties concerned to reach and maintain durable cease-fire arrangements;  
5.       Reiterates in the context of paragraphs 3 and 4 above its earlier calls for the restoration of economic, transport and energy links in the region;  
6.       Endorses the continuing efforts by the Minsk Group of the CSCE to achieve a peaceful solution to the conflict, including efforts to implement resolution 822 (1993) , and expresses its grave concern at the disruptive effect that the escalation of armed hostilities has had on these efforts;  
7.       Welcomes the preparations for a CSCE monitor mission with a timetable for its deployment, as well as consideration within the CSCE of the proposal for a CSCE presence in the region;  
8.       Urges the parties concerned to refrain from any action that will obstruct a peaceful solution to the conflict, and to pursue negotiations within the Minsk Group of the CSCE, as well as through direct contacts between them, towards a final settlement;  
9.       Urges the Government of the Republic of Armenia to continue to exert its influence to achieve compliance by the Armenians of the Nagorny-Karabakh region of the Azerbaijani Republic with its resolution 822 (1993) and the present resolution, and the acceptance by this party of the proposals of the Minsk Group of the CSCE;  
10.     Urges States to refrain from the supply of any weapons and munitions which might lead to an intensification of the conflict or the continued occupation of territory;  
11.     Calls once again for unimpeded access for international humanitarian relief efforts in the region, in particular in all areas affected by the conflict, in order to alleviate the increased suffering of the civilian population and reaffirms that all parties are bound to comply with the principles and rules of international humanitarian law;  
12.     Requests the Secretary-General and relevant international agencies to provide urgent humanitarian assistance to the affected civilian population and to assist displaced persons to return to their homes;  
13.     Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Chairman-in-Office of the CSCE as well as the Chairman of the Minsk Group, to continue to report to the Council on the situation;  
14.     Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.       
