UNITED NATIONS
Security Council

S
Distr. GENERAL S/RES/1055 (1996) 8 May 1996

RESOLUTION 1055 (1996)
Adopted by the Security Council at its 3662nd meeting, on 8 May 1996

The Security Council,
Reaffirming its resolution 696 (1991) of 30 May 1991 and all subsequent relevant resolutions,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General dated 30 April 1996 (S/1996/328),
Reaffirming its commitment to preserve the unity and territorial integrity of Angola,
Reiterating the importance it attaches to the full and timely implementation by the Government of Angola and União Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) of the "Acordos de Paz" (S/22609, annex), the Lusaka Protocol (S/1994/1441, annex) and relevant Security Council resolutions,
Recognizing that although some progress has been made towards consolidating the peace process, the overall pace has been disappointingly slow,
Noting with concern the repeated delays in the implementation of successive timetables agreed to by the two parties, in particular the quartering of UNITA troops and the completion of talks on military issues regarding the integration of the armed forces,
Taking note that five months have elapsed since the first UNITA troops arrived in quartering areas and expressing concern that prolonging the stay of troops in quartering areas puts strains on United Nations resources and on discipline within UNITA ranks,
Noting the agreement reached between the President of Angola and the Chairman of UNITA in Libreville, Gabon, on 1 March 1996 (S/1996/175, annex) on the formation of the unified armed forces by June 1996 as well as the

96-11864 (E)

/...

S/RES/1055 (1996) Page 2
establishment of the Government of National Unity and Reconciliation between June and July 1996,
Recalling its resolution 976 (1995) of 8 February 1995 which stated, inter alia, the expectation that the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) would complete its mission by February 1997,
Emphasizing the need for adequate security for all United Nations and other international personnel and awaiting the results of the investigation of the deaths on 3 April 1996 of two UNAVEM III military observers and a humanitarian assistance official,
Underlining the need for respect for human rights and urging the Angolan parties to give greater attention to preventing and investigating incidents of human rights abuse,
Expressing concern at the extensive presence of landmines throughout Angola and emphasizing the need for the political will to speed up demining efforts to enable the free circulation of people and goods and to restore public confidence,
Stressing the importance of the demilitarization of Angolan society, including the disarmament of the civilian population and the demobilization and social reintegration of ex-combatants,
Reiterating the importance of reconstruction and rehabilitation of the Angolan national economy and its vital contribution to a durable peace,
Welcoming the efforts by Member States, in particular the three observer States to the Angolan peace process, the Organization of African Unity, and the international community as a whole to promote peace and security in Angola,
1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General dated 30 April 1996;
2. Decides to extend the mandate of UNAVEM III until 11 July 1996;
3. Expresses profound regret at the overall slow pace of implementation of the peace process which is far behind schedule;
4. Notes with deep concern the failure of UNITA to complete the quartering of all its troops by 8 May 1996 in accordance with resolution 1045 (1996) of 8 February 1996;
5. Reiterates that quartering and disarming of UNITA troops are crucial components of the peace process which are fundamental to its success and stresses that further procrastination cannot be justified and, if continued, could bring about the collapse of the whole peace process;
6. Notes the recent progress in the quartering of UNITA troops and calls upon UNITA to fulfil by June 1996 its obligation to complete the credible, uninterrupted and fully verifiable quartering of its troops and to turn over to UNAVEM III all arms, ammunition and military equipment;
/...

S/RES/1055 (1996) Page 3
7. Calls upon UNITA to release unconditionally and without further delay all remaining prisoners in accordance with its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol;
8. Underlines the importance of completion of the talks on military issues regarding the integration of UNITA troops into the Angolan Armed Forces (FAA) and formation of a joint military command and urges the two parties to resolve the remaining issues by 15 May 1996, as agreed in the Joint Commission calendar of actions for May;
9. Welcomes the proclamation by the National Assembly of Angola of amnesty arrangements, as agreed in Libreville, for offences resulting from the Angolan conflict, in order to facilitate the formation of a joint military command;
10. Urges the Government of Angola and UNITA to abide strictly by their obligations under the Lusaka Protocol as well as the commitments entered into in Libreville, Gabon, on 1 March 1996, including the selection of UNITA troops for incorporation into the FAA and the completion of the formation of the unified armed forces by June 1996;
11. Urges also the Government of Angola and UNITA to take all necessary steps for UNITA deputies to take their places in the National Assembly, for the beginning of the controlled movement of UNITA troops out of quartering areas in accordance with the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol, for the incorporation of UNITA personnel into the State administration, the FAA and the national police, for the orderly transition of demobilized troops to civilian life, for moving constitutional issues forward in a spirit of national reconciliation, and for the formation of the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation by July 1996;
12. Encourages the President of Angola and the Chairman of UNITA to meet at the earliest opportunity within Angola to resolve all remaining issues;
13. Welcomes the progress made by the Government of Angola in quartering the rapid reaction police;
14. Urges the Government of Angola to continue to pull back its forces from areas near UNITA quartering sites and to complete the return of the rapid reaction police to barracks under UNAVEM III monitoring in accordance with the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol;
15. Notes the intention of the Joint Commission to study the plan for the disarmament of the civilian population and urges the parties to begin its implementation without delay;
16. Reminds the Government of Angola and UNITA of their obligation to cease the dissemination of hostile propaganda;
17. Calls upon the Government of Angola to provide the requisite facilities for the establishment of an independent United Nations radio;
/...

S/RES/1055 (1996) Page 4
18. Also calls upon the Government of Angola and UNITA to signal their commitment to peace by destroying their stockpiles of landmines and to begin this process through joint public action;
19. Reaffirms the obligation of all States to implement fully the provisions of paragraph 19 of resolution 864 (1993) of 15 September 1993 and reiterates that continuing acquisition of weapons would be contrary to paragraph 12 of resolution 976 (1995) of 8 February 1995 and undermine confidence in the peace process;
20. Notes with concern reports that UNITA has impeded, on occasion, the work of UNAVEM III and reminds the parties, in particular UNITA, to extend full cooperation to UNAVEM III and the Joint Commission at all levels;
21. Demands that all parties and others concerned in Angola take all necessary measures to ensure the safety of United Nations and international personnel and premises and guarantee the safety and freedom of movement of humanitarian supplies throughout the country;
22. Commends the Joint Commission and the Armed Conflict Prevention Group for the positive role they continue to play in support of the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol;
23. Commends also the efforts of the Secretary-General, his Special Representative and the personnel of UNAVEM III to facilitate the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol;
24. Urges Member States to provide the assistance necessary to facilitate the demobilization and social reintegration of ex-combatants;
25. Urges also the international community to continue to provide the assistance necessary to facilitate the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the Angolan national economy, provided that the two parties meet their obligations under the Lusaka Protocol;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to report by 1 July 1996 on the progress made toward meeting the goals and timetable agreed between the two parties, and to keep the Council fully informed on a regular basis on developments in the situation on the ground, in particular by providing a comprehensive briefing by 17 May 1996 on whether the two parties have fulfilled the tasks they have specified in the Joint Commission calendar of actions for May to be carried out by 15 May 1996;
27. Declares that it will place special emphasis, during its future discussion of the mandate of UNAVEM III, on the progress demonstrated by the parties;
28. Reiterates its readiness, in light of recommendations by the Secretary-General and the state of affairs in Angola, to consider any further measures;
29. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
-----

