UNITED NATIONS
Security Council

S
Distr. GENERAL S/RES/1128 (1997) 12 September 1997

RESOLUTION 1128 (1997)
Adopted by the Security Council at its 3816th meeting, on 12 September 1997

The Security Council,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions and the statements of its President,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan of 4 September 1997 (S/1997/686 and Add.1),
Reaffirming its commitment to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Tajikistan and to the inviolability of its borders,
Welcoming the successful conclusion of the inter-Tajik talks, conducted under United Nations auspices since 1994, with the signing by the President of Tajikistan and the leader of the United Tajik Opposition in Moscow on 27 June 1997 of the General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan (S/1997/510),

Taking note that the implementation of the General Agreement will require the consistent good faith and constant effort of the parties, as well as the sustained and vigorous support of the United Nations and the international community,
Taking note with appreciation of the readiness of the Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States (the CIS Peacekeeping Forces) to assist in providing security for United Nations personnel at the request of the United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) and with the agreement of the parties,
Expressing concern that the security situation in Tajikistan remains volatile,
1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of 4 September 1997;

2. Takes note of the recommendations on the expansion of UNMOT contained therein;

97-23885 (E)

/...

S/RES/1128 (1997) Page 2
3. Calls upon the parties to implement fully the General Agreement and encourages them to resume without delay the work of the Commission on National Reconciliation in Dushanbe;
4. Commends the efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and of the personnel of UNMOT, encourages them to continue assisting the parties in the implementation of the General Agreement through their good offices and calls upon the parties to cooperate fully with these efforts;
5. Calls upon the parties to cooperate further in ensuring the safety and freedom of movement of the personnel of the United Nations, the CIS Peacekeeping Forces and other international personnel;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore ways to provide security for United Nations personnel;
7. Decides to extend the present mandate of UNMOT for a period of two months until 15 November 1997;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Council informed of all significant developments, in particular on an adequate solution to the security problem, and expresses its readiness to take a decision concerning the extension of the UNMOT mandate recommended by the Secretary-General;
9. Encourages Member States and others concerned to continue to respond promptly and generously to the urgent humanitarian needs in Tajikistan and to offer support to Tajikistan for rehabilitation, aimed at mitigation of the consequences of the war and reconstruction of its economy;
10. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
-----

