UNITED NATIONS
Security Council

S
Distr. GENERAL S/RES/1206 (1998) 12 November 1998

RESOLUTION 1206 (1998)
Adopted by the Security Council at its 3943rd meeting, on 12 November 1998
The Security Council,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions and the statements of its President,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan of 3 November 1998 (S/1998/1029),
Reaffirming its commitment to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Tajikistan and to the inviolability of its borders,
Welcoming the movement towards the implementation of the General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan (S/1997/510) and the effective maintenance of the ceasefire between the Government of Tajikistan and the United Tajik Opposition (UTO), and noting that there remain difficulties to be resolved in this regard,
Welcoming further the intensified regular contacts between the leaderships of the Government of Tajikistan and the UTO which helped to contain the crises in the period covered by the report of the Secretary-General, confirmed the commitment of both parties to the peace process and contributed to the implementation of the General Agreement,
Welcoming the maintenance of close contact by the United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) with the parties, as well as its cooperative liaison with the Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States (the CIS Peacekeeping Forces), the Russian border forces and the Mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
Welcoming also the contribution of the Contact Group of Guarantor States and International Organizations to the peace process,
Expressing concern at the precarious security situation in some parts of Tajikistan,

98-34888 (E)

/...

S/RES/1206 (1998) Page 2
Deeply concerned that there has not been sufficient progress in establishing all relevant facts concerning the murder of four members of UNMOT in July 1998,
1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of 3 November 1998;
2. Strongly condemns the recent fighting in the Leninabad area initiated by forces trying to hinder the peace process in Tajikistan, and calls upon all concerned to refrain from the use of force;
3. Calls upon the parties to undertake vigorous efforts to implement fully the General Agreement, including the Protocol on military issues (S/1997/209, annex II), and to create conditions for the holding of elections at the earliest possible time in 1999;
4. Notes with appreciation the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, commends the efforts of all the personnel of UNMOT and encourages them to continue assisting the parties in the implementation of the General Agreement;
5. Welcomes the continued contribution made by the CIS Peacekeeping Forces in assisting the parties in the implementation of the General Agreement in coordination with all concerned;
6. Strongly condemns the murder of four members of UNMOT, recognizes that the completion of the investigation into this case is important for the resumption of the field activities of UNMOT, urges the Government of Tajikistan to complete the investigation expeditiously and to bring to justice all those found to be responsible for the crime and also urges the UTO leaders to continue to cooperate fully with these efforts;
7. Acknowledges the efforts of the Government of Tajikistan to enhance the protection of international personnel and calls upon the parties to cooperate further in ensuring the safety and freedom of movement of the personnel of the United Nations, the CIS Peacekeeping Forces and other international personnel;
8. Notes with satisfaction the meeting of the Consultative Group held by the World Bank on 20 May 1998, and calls upon Member States and others concerned to respond promptly and generously to the consolidated appeal for Tajikistan for 1998 launched in Geneva in March 1998;
9. Recognizes that comprehensive international support remains essential for the intensification of the peace process in Tajikistan and reminds both parties that the ability of the international community to mobilize and to continue assistance for Tajikistan is linked to the security of the personnel of UNMOT and international organizations, and of humanitarian workers;
10. Decides to extend the mandate of UNMOT for a period of six months until 15 May 1999;
/...

S/RES/1206 (1998) Page 3
11. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Council informed of all significant developments, in particular regarding the security situation and measures taken to enhance the security of UNMOT, and also requests him to report within three months of the adoption of this resolution on its implementation;
12. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
-----

