
Resolution 127 (1958) of 22 January 1958 
  


Publisher
UN Security Council


Publication Date
22 January 1958


Citation / Document Symbol
S/RES/127 (1958)


Reference
1958 Security Council Resolutions


Cite as

UN Security Council, Resolution 127 (1958) of 22 January 1958, 22 January 1958, S/RES/127 (1958), available at: http://www.refworld.org/docid/3b00f1ee18.html [accessed 4 April 2016]        

   


    
The Security Council,  
Recalling its consideration on 6 September 19571 of the complaint of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan concerning activities conducted by Israel in the zone between the armistice demarcation lines in the area of Government House at Jerusalem,  
Having considered the report relating to the zone dated 23 September 1957, submitted in response to the request by the Acting Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine,2  
Noting that the status of the zone is affected by the revisions of the Israel-Jordan General Armistice Agreement3 and that neither Israel nor Jordan enjoys sovereignty over any part of the zone (the zone being beyond the respective demarcation lines),  
Motivated by a desire to reduce tensions and avoid the creation of new incidents,  
1.         Directs the Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine to regulate activities within the zone subject to such arrangements as may be made pursuant to the provisions of the General Armistice Agreement and pursuant to paragraph 3 below, bearing in mind ownership of property there, it being understood that, unless otherwise mutually agreed, Israelis should not be allowed to use Arab-owned properties and Arabs should not be allowed to use Israeli-owned properties;  
2.         Directs the Chief of Staff to conduct a survey of property records with a view to determining property ownership in the zone.  
3.         Endorses the recommendations of the Acting Chief of Staff that:  
(a)    The parties should discuss through the Mixed Armistice Commission civilian activities in the zone;  
(b)   In order to create an atmosphere which would be more conducive to fruitful discussion, activities in the zone, such as those initiated by Israelis on 21 July 1957, should be suspended until such time as the survey has been completed and provisions made for the regulation of activities in the zone,  
(c)    Such discussions should be completed within a period of two months;  
(d)    The Security Council should be advised of the result of the discussions;  
4.         Calls upon the parties to the Israel-Jordan General Armistice Agreement to co-operate with the Chief of Staff and in the Mixed Armistice Commission in carrying out these recommendations pursuant to the present resolution;  
5.         Calls upon the parties to the Israel-Jordan General Armistice Agreement to observe article III of the Agreement and prevent all forces referred to in article I][ of the Agreement from passing over the armistice demarcation lines and to remove or destroy all their respective military facilities and installations in the zone;  
6.         Calls upon the parties to use the machinery provided for in the General Armistice Agreement for the implementation of the provisions of that Agreement;  
7.         Requests the Chief of Staff to report on the implementation of the present resolution.  
Adopted unanimously at the 810th meeting.  
             
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twelfth Year, 787th and 788th meetings.      
2 Ibid., Twelfth Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1957, document S/3892.      
3 Ibid., Fourth Year, Special Supplement No. 1.         
