UNITED NATIONS
Security Council

S
Distr. GENERAL S/RES/1286 (2000) 19 January 2000

RESOLUTION 1286 (2000)
Adopted by the Security Council at its 4091st meeting, on 19 January 2000
The Security Council,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions and statements by its President on the situation in Burundi,
Expressing concern at the dire economic, humanitarian and social conditions in Burundi,
Expressing deep concern at the ongoing violence and insecurity in Burundi marked by increased attacks by armed groups on the civilian population in and around the capital,
Noting with concern the implications of the situation in Burundi for the region as well as the consequences for Burundi of continued regional instability,
Recognizing the important role of the States of the region, in particular Tanzania, which is host to hundreds of thousands of Burundian refugees and home to the Julius Nyerere Foundation, which has provided outstanding support to the talks,
Noting that the United Nations agencies, regional and non-governmental organizations, in cooperation with host Governments, are making use of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement (E/bkc CN.4/1998/53 and Add.1-2), inter alia, in Africa,
Welcoming the human rights programme undertaken by the United Nations and the cooperation afforded to it by the Government of Burundi and political parties in Burundi,
Reaffirming that the renewed Arusha peace process represents the most viable basis for a resolution of the conflict together with the continued efforts to build an internal political partnership in Burundi,

00-24782 (E)

/...

S/RES/1286 (2000) Page 2
1. Warmly endorses and strongly supports the designation by the Eighth Arusha Regional Summit on 1 December 1999 of Nelson Mandela, former President of the Republic of South Africa, as the new Facilitator of the Arusha peace process, successor to the late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, expresses its strongest support for his efforts to achieve a peaceful solution to the conflict in Burundi, and welcomes the successful meeting in Arusha on 16 January 2000 launching his initiative;
2. Reiterates its strong support for the renewed Arusha peace process, endorses the call at the Eighth Arusha Regional Summit for all parties to the conflict in Burundi to extend maximum cooperation to the new peace process Facilitator, and calls for increased efforts to build an internal political partnership in Burundi;
3. Endorses efforts by the Secretary-General to enhance the role of the United Nations in Burundi, and in particular the continued work of his Special Representative for the Great Lakes region;
4. Commends those Burundian parties, including the Government, that have demonstrated their commitment to continue negotiations, and calls on all parties that remain outside the Arusha peace process to cease hostilities and to participate fully in that process;
5. Expresses appreciation for international donor support, and appeals for increased assistance for the Arusha peace process;
6. Condemns continuing violence perpetrated by all parties, and in particular by those non-State actors who refuse to participate in the Arusha peace process, and strongly urges all parties to end the ongoing armed conflict and to resolve their differences peacefully;
7. Condemns attacks against civilians in Burundi, and calls for an immediate end to these criminal acts;
8. Strongly condemns the murder of United Nations Children's Fund and World Food Programme personnel and Burundian civilians in Rutana province in October 1999, and urges that the perpetrators be effectively brought to justice;
9. Calls for all parties to ensure the safe and unhindered access of humanitarian assistance to those in need in Burundi, and to guarantee fully the safety, security and freedom of movement of United Nations and associated personnel;
10. Calls for the immediate, full, safe and unhindered access of humanitarian workers and human rights observers to all regroupment camps, and calls for internees to have access to their livelihoods outside these camps;
11. Encourages further progress between the United Nations and the Government of Burundi and political parties in Burundi in establishing appropriate security guarantees for United Nations humanitarian agencies to resume field operations;
/...

S/RES/1286 (2000) Page 3
12. Calls upon neighbouring States, where appropriate, to take measures to halt cross-border insurgent activity, and the illicit flow of arms and ammunition, and to ensure the neutrality, security, and civilian character of refugee camps;
13. Calls for donors to provide humanitarian and human rights assistance to Burundi and to resume substantial economic and development assistance with due regard to security conditions;
14. Urges the international community to examine the economic development needs of Burundi with a view to establishing stable long-term conditions for the well-being of the Burundian people and for the return of refugees;
15. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
-----

