UNITED NATIONS
Security Council

S
Distr. GENERAL S/RES/1008 (1995) 7 August 1995

RESOLUTION 1008 (1995)
Adopted by the Security Council at its 3562nd meeting, on 7 August 1995
The Security Council,
Reaffirming its resolution 696 (1991) of 30 May 1991 and all subsequent relevant resolutions,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General dated 17 July 1995 (S/1995/588),
Welcoming the briefing by the Secretary-General on 25 July 1995 on his recent visit to Angola,
Reaffirming its commitment to preserve the unity and territorial integrity of Angola,
Reiterating the importance it attaches to the full implementation by the Government of Angola and Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) of the "Acordos de Paz" (S/22609, annex), the Lusaka Protocol (S/1994/1441, annex) and relevant Security Council resolutions,
Noting the agreement reached between the Government of Angola and UNITA on the adjusted and accelerated timetable for the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol,
Commending the continued efforts of the Secretary-General, his Special Representative, the three observer states to the Angolan peace process and the personnel of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) to facilitate the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and to consolidate the cease-fire and the peace process which has entered a new and promising phase,
Noting also that the situation in most of the country is fairly calm, but concerned at the number of cease-fire violations,

95-23340 (E)

/...

S/RES/1008 (1995) English Page 2
Welcoming the meeting in Lusaka on 6 May 1995 between the President of Angola, Mr. Jose Eduardo dos Santos, and the leader of UNITA, Mr. Jonas Savimbi, which led to the diminishing atmosphere of mistrust and intensification of highlevel contacts between the Government of Angola and UNITA,
Recognizing that the progressive deployment of United Nations military and Police Observers and troops has significantly contributed to consolidation of the cease-fire,
Welcoming the commitment of the international community to assist and support the economic, social and reconstruction efforts of Angola and recognizing the importance of such assistance in sustaining a secure and stable environment,
Expressing concern at reports of human rights violations and recognizing the contribution that human rights monitors can make in building confidence in the peace process,
1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General dated 17 July 1995;
2. Decides to extend the mandate of UNAVEM III until 8 February 1996;
3. Commends the Government of Angola and UNITA for their commitment to the peace process and notes the progress made thus far in the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol;
4. Expresses concern at the slow pace in the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, in particular troop disengagement, demining and the establishment of quartering areas and expects the Government of Angola and UNITA, in cooperation with UNAVEM III, to finalize arrangements for establishment of quartering areas, complete troops disengagement, and to expedite the conduct of demining;
5. Urges the Government of Angola and UNITA to adhere strictly to the revised timetable on the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and make concerted efforts to accelerate that process;
6. Stresses the importance of the completion of the electoral process, as provided for in the Lusaka Protocol;
7. Calls upon the Government of Angola and UNITA to adopt without further delay a comprehensive and workable programme for the formation of the new armed forces, and accelerate the exchange of prisoners and the repatriation of mercenaries with a view to reinforcing the freedom of movement of people throughout the country;
8. Takes note of the progress noted by the Secretary-General in the establishment of triangular communications between the Angolan parties and UNAVEM III and requests the Government of Angola and UNITA to assign urgently liaison officers to UNAVEM III regional headquarters;
9. Urges the two parties to put an immediate and definitive end to the renewed laying of mines and to reported unauthorized movement of troops;
/...

S/RES/1008 (1995) English 3

Page

10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the deployment of UNAVEM III infantry units and accelerate it as conditions for sustaining and employing troops improve, with the objective of reaching full strength as soon as possible;
11. Urges the Government of Angola and UNITA to provide UNAVEM III with the necessary information and ensure the freedom of movement of UNAVEM III, including full unimpeded access to all military facilities, to enable it effectively to discharge its mandate;
12. Requests that the Secretary-General report on his analysis on the completion of the objectives of the Lusaka Protocol and of the mandate of UNAVEM III, in light of the alterations in the timetable for deployment of UNAVEM III;
13. Stresses the need for dissemination of objective information through radio UNAVEM and for the Government of Angola to provide all facilities for the prompt functioning of the radio;
14. Stresses the importance it attaches to the disarmament of the civilian population, and urges that it begin without further delay;
15. Notes with concern increasing levels of violence perpetrated by unaffiliated groups, and calls on all parties to seek to control and disarm these threats to the peace process;
16. Authorizes the Secretary-General to increase as appropriate the strength of UNAVEM III's human rights unit;
17. Commends Member States, United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations for their substantial contributions to meet the humanitarian needs of the Angolan people;
18. Demands that the Government of Angola and UNITA take necessary measures to ensure the safe passage of humanitarian supplies throughout the country;
19. Requests the Government of Angola to continue providing substantial contributions to the United Nations peace-keeping operations and call upon UNITA to make every effort to contribute proportionally in order to assist with the United Nations peace-keeping operation in Angola;
20. Endorses the Secretary-General's appeal and encourages donors to respond with generous and timely financial contributions to the humanitarian effort and provision of mine clearance, bridging and road repair equipment and materials and other supplies necessary for setting up the quartering areas;
21. Endorses also the Secretary-General's intention to submit a comprehensive report to the Council every two months;

S/RES/1008 (1995) English Page 4
22. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
-----

